Oh everybody this is a talk entitled the
life and death of stars and it's part of
a series introductory astronomy talks
that I've put together and that's why
I've given on various cruise ships and
excursions all around the world so we're
going to talk about us we perhaps should
talk first about our Sun here's a
fantastic sunset showing the Sun going
down shows just how small the Sun
actually is against the horizon there
but of course we'd perhaps look at a few
basic facts about our Sun before we go
any further what is it well people talk
about it being as a giant ball of gas
temperature of five-and-a-half thousand
degrees centigrade of course the
temperature at the visible surface that
you can see in this marvellous
photograph here it's really rather large
1.2 million kilometers in diameter so
that's over a hundred times the size of
the earth and in terms of volume you
could drop a million earths inside it if
you want the numbers the mass is 2 times
10 to the power of 30 kilograms it's
just a number you can't get your brain
around but that's three hundred and
thirty three thousand times the mass of
the earth and that tells us something
about the density with it being a
million times the volume but only
300,000 times the mass the density is
quite low around about 1.4 grams for
every cubic centimeter on average and
that's only a little bit more than the
density of water
which is of course one gram that's
because it's made mostly of these very
light gases hydrogen makes up nearly 75
percent helium nearly 25 percent leaving
a tiny fraction of the other elements
all of the interesting ones carbon
oxygen nitrogen and so on make up a
really very small fraction indeed but an
interestingly significant one of course
from our point of view as
the essentials of life around 4.6
billion years old
and that's a little bit older than the
earth the Sun probably formed in the
center of the solar system while the
earth was still getting its act together
in the cloud of gas and dust that was
left over orbiting around the Sun but we
talk about the Sun being a ball of gas
and that's not really quite right it's
actually a ball of plasma and plasma is
a fourth state of matter the normal
states of matter that we're familiar
with are solids where all the atoms are
rigidly packed together and held
together by strong bonds liquids where
the bonds between the atoms are weaker
and they're able to flow around each
other are still held together but
nevertheless the shape can change very
easily and gases where the atoms and
molecules are free to move around and
expand into any container they find
themselves in and plasma is like a gas
in that respect but when you get to such
high temperatures all of the electrons
get ripped away from the nuclei of the
atoms so the atoms are torn apart and
releasing their electrons so you get in
the case of hydrogen plasma you'll have
a sea of protons mixed with a sea of
electrons all flowing through each other
and it'll be an electrically charged
material as a result but if we've in
this story with Lord Kelvin who asked
some very interesting and deep questions
about the Sun he started off with what
powers the Sun he couldn't really
understand how it was managing to
continually put out the same amount of
heat without apparently cooling down any
normal object that's hot losing heat out
to space is going to cool down unless of
course new energy is being supplied to
keep it at the same high temperature and
Kelvin wondered what the source of that
energy could be
and how long could the Sun continue to
shine based on that source of energy a
victorian-era gentleman he decided to do
some comparisons and he worked out that
comparing its to the system of the age
the power generated by steam trains from
the burning of coal if he had a pile of
coal the same mass as the Sun then he
figured that he could extract energy
from that by burning the coal at the
same rate that the Sun was pouring
energy out into space and it would only
last for three thousand years now the
problem with that is he knew already
that the earth had been around longer
than that and that civilizations in
ancient Egypt and China
for example had got records dating back
to more than three thousand years ago
and so that couldn't be right so he
turned to the other force that they then
knew about a--they we realized that
contraction and things falling down a
hill release energy under gravity if you
have an object you let it fall the work
done on it by the force of gravity as it
falls makes it pick up speed and then as
it hits the ground it will dump all that
energy as heat likewise if you try and
lift an object off the ground you have
to do work against gravity and put
energy into it to lift it higher up so
he realized that actually a contraction
of them the Sun by just 1% would release
enough energy from gravity to power the
Sun for two hundred thousand years which
is a really quite a long time much
longer than you could get from burning
that mass of coal the trouble was that
geologists by this stage were beginning
to realize that the earth was probably
millions of years old and two hundred
thousand years just still didn't look
like enough so he thought about what
happens when meteors fall in and crash
into the earth they come in at quite
high speed and smash into the ground are
often vaporized in the process because
they release all their kinetic energy of
movement as heat so he calculated what
if we started off with a lot of
individual pieces of the Sun all
distributed out in the reach outer
reaches of the solar system and they all
collapsed down from there under gravity
into the center where the mass of the
Sun is now and that amount of in falling
lead led kelvin to an estimate that he
could account for the sun having a life
of twenty million years which is much
more like it but about time he done this
calculation sadly it turned out that the
geologists had moved the goal posts
again and in fact they were now talking
about the earth being not just millions
but perhaps hundreds of millions or
billions of years old but of course back
in days lord kelvin didn't know about
radioactivity and the energy stored in
the atomic nucleus radioactivity wasn't
discovered for another thirty years
after kelvin was doing those estimates
and they was discovered that you got
quite a lot of energy out when heavy
atoms like radium or uranium would split
sponte spontaneously spitting out other
particles and energy and that the amount
of power locked in the nucleus was
thousands of times more than that of any
chemical bonding caused by the atoms
joining together and sharing their
electrons because in the 20th century
that was followed up by the discovery of
nuclear fission where we could
deliberately take heavier elements like
uranium and smash them apart and release
the energy inside them either in the
uncontrolled manner of a nuclear
explosion or more
carefully controlled inside a nuclear
reactor and make useful energy out of it
you do get plenty of energy and that
would be thousands of times more than
you get from any chemical burning
process but the Sun is not made of heavy
metals like uranium it's made of
hydrogen and helium the light elements
as we've already seen so it was a
slightly different process that was
required that is the process of nuclear
fusion whereby the light elements are
turned into heavier ones and stars act
like pressure cookers cooking up the
hydrogen that's the most common element
in the universe and smashing the nuclei
of hydrogen together the nuclei of a
simple hydrogen atom is a proton single
positively charged particle shown in red
on the diagram there we start with four
of them at the top and we smash them
together in pairs to create a two
particle nucleus with one Neutron and
one proton that's a hydrogen - or
deuterium nucleus and in the process we
get a burst of energy we give up one of
these little grey particles that's a
positron and that's an antimatter
electron and it will go on and find an
ordinary electron and annihilate with it
and give us a little bit more energy and
we get a gamma ray which is just a
high-energy form of light carrying a lot
of the energy away so that's the first
step then we add another proton and we
get some more energy and gamma ray and
we get a three particle nucleus two
protons and a new Neutron a two protons
are the neutron is a helium-3
nucleus and you can smash two of those
together and turn it into a helium four
nucleus shown at the bottom there for
particles two neutrons to protons and
you get two protons back so if you do
the cosmic accounting here you start
with four protons at the top you add two
more the second stage so that's six
going in you get two hours
at the end so it's a net for and you end
up with 1/4 particle nucleus of helium
helium 4 there but it releases energy
all those stages along the way and
that's more than enough to power a star
like the Sun for billions of years so
that process is going on inside the core
inside the pressure cooker of the Sun
and it's only right in that core because
it needs the very high temperatures and
very high pressures to cram those
positively charged protons together
being both positively charged they want
to repel each other with the
electrostatic force and so you have to
smash them together quite hard to
overcome that here's a diagram of the
insides of the Sun and you can see we
have the core in the center where that
fusion process is carried out the energy
streams away from that heating up the
outer layers of the Sun which then
convict around and like boiling treacle
bring it to the surface and then once
there reaches a sufficiently low
pressure at the surface it can escape
again as radiation in the form of
visible light and infrared heat
radiation well let's have a look at what
we see on the surface of the Sun and I
must just say don't try looking at the
Sun with any optical instrument
binoculars or telescope unless you
absolutely know what you're doing and
how to do it safely because it can be
very dangerous this a lot of heat in the
radiation from the Sun and you can burn
your retina in your eye very very
quickly so here's a picture I took of
the Sun with a very special telescope
that allows me to do that safely this
was taken in 2004 and it shows the
planet Venus crossing in front of the
disk of the Sun there so you can see how
much larger the Sun appears compared to
Venus Venus is of course about the same
size as the earth and right in the
center of that pick
there's a couple of little tiny specks
which are sunspots sometimes the Sun has
much more activity than others and
here's our NASA image of a couple of
groups of sunspots much larger and much
more complicated and we've zoomed in on
one of them on the enlargement on the
right there and you can see the dark
centers of the sunspots and the material
emanating around from them flowing away
from them where there are a curious
pattern and then the surrounding boiling
treacle like surface of the of the
ordinary parts of the Sun now these are
not holes these are not really even dark
they temperature of the center of those
sunspots is around 3,000 degrees they
just look faint and dark in these
photographs by contrast with the much
brighter surrounding surface if you
looked at them on their own they would
be glowing red hot but if you look at
that pattern around the outside of the
sunspots it's very reminiscent button
you get in a magnetic field around a bar
magnets if you drop iron filings on a
sheet of paper and get the idea yeah
there's some spots at the bottom and
iron filings on a sheet of paper with a
magnet underneath in it and you can see
the way the field lines do the same sort
of pattern as you get from the sunspots
we could look at in in three dimensions
here's a side-on view of a sunspot
grouping and you can see how the
material is in fact flowing around from
one sunspot to the other making these
great loops out from the surface of the
Sun the materials following those
magnetic field lines as if there's a
giant magnet underneath the surface of
the Sun and it's true that the sunspots
are either a north pole or a South Pole
and you do tend to find that if you look
at any group of sunspots they'll always
be there in pairs that can get quite
complicated but nevertheless there's
always a north pole for every South Pole
the feat is that we see on the Sun are
some of these eruptions off the surface
this is a photograph that I took with a
small amateur telescope showing some
fire fountain eruptions on the edge of
the Sun they're against the blackness of
space
throwing material out and falling back
under gravity and then in the middle of
the disk of the Sun we've got some
little darker lines and I've mark those
as filaments it turns out filaments and
prominences are the same thing they're
just as the material comes up away from
the Sun it cools and so when you are
looking directly down on it
with the brightness of the Sun in the
background it looks dark against that
much brighter background much in the
same way that the sunspots do but we can
use other instruments to look at the Sun
this is the solar dynamics observatory a
space satellite looking at the Sun using
x-rays and we can see a very active
region of sunspots in the middle there
and this rather weirdly colored picture
lots of loops and eruptions on the
surface now we can also trace the
temperature because the x-rays come from
very very hot gas and it's a little bit
of a mystery as to why some of the outer
layers above the normal visible surface
of the Sun gets so hot it's something to
do with all of the twisted magnetic
fields interacting with the thin gas
that heats it up when we have a solar
eclipse we can see their outer layer of
the Sun called the corona it's a great
cosmic coincidence that the moon is 400
times smaller than the Sun but it's also
400 times nearer so they appear almost
the same size in the sky so can line up
and block out the main disc of the
bright part of the Sun and let us see
the hot outer thin wispy Corona the
outer atmosphere of the Sun and we can
even see their sun's magnetic field the
overall north and south pole they're
being slightly angled and creating
structure in that very very hot thin gas
now sometimes the Sun is even more
active and throws off solar flares
here's a great image of an enormous
eruption from the surface of the Sun and
I've actually got that as an animation
for you here so with the background
music going we have an enormous eruption
coming off the Sun there and you can see
how the surface of the Sun is boiling
and changing all the time here we go
again I'll show it to you another time
absolutely huge eruption now fortunately
that one's not pointing our way it's
over towards the edge of the Sun and so
it's not facing straight towards the
earth you can imagine that the Sun is
producing these all of the time and only
very occasionally
does one erupt right in what would be
the line of sight from the Sun to the
earth so that we're staring straight
down the gun barrel of this eruption and
it sends a huge jet of charged particles
and ionizing radiation across space
towards the earth now very hopefully we
have our magnetic shields up this is
always good in Star Trek and it's good
for the planet Earth to have it shields
up as well because it means that most of
the harmful effects of all of this
material coming from the Sun that takes
about 36 hours to travel 150 million
kilometers from the Sun to the earth
then gets deflected by those shields
around and away but some of it gets in
and it gets in at the weak points which
you can see are the North and South
Poles of the Earth's magnetic field and
there it can get channeled down in and
crash into the earth salmon and when it
does so it creates the Northern Lights
the Earth's atmosphere acts as the last
line of defense against this radiation
coming from space and the atoms get lit
up as their electrons are knocked into
crazy orbits you get that characteristic
green color that's from oxygen high up
in the Earth's
fear and you get some of the other
colors from nitrogen and so on the
different molecules and gases within our
Earth's atmosphere it's an example of a
solar flare that was a very very
powerful one indeed so powerful that it
actually overloaded the spacecraft x-ray
detectors this is again filmed in x-rays
so this was a huge eruption producing a
very powerful beam of matter and energy
but it's on the edge of the Sun it
wasn't coming towards us here on earth
so it didn't disrupt anything
however here's one that did come our way
we've got several satellites looking at
the Sun from different angles and so we
can chart the solar wind in three
dimensions on the rotating diagram there
you've got the Sun in the center and the
planets marked as little different
colored squares and you can see how an
enormous pulse of material erupts away
from the Sun there it goes and travels
out across the solar system sweeping
across the planet Earth which is the
little yellow dot at three o'clock on
the diagram there so that one definitely
did come our way and on the right there
we can see the effect the auroral
display of Northern Lights taken in
August of 2011 from Minnesota there that
resulted from all that material crashing
into our atmosphere but the most
powerful solar flare on this it was
called the Carrington event was in
September of 1859 Richard Carrington a
British amateur astronomer was in his
garden plotting the sunspots on a piece
of card and projecting the image of the
Sun onto the card for safety and he
suddenly saw what he's marked on the
diagram here as points a and B two very
bright regions that popped up really
quite quickly so he popped next door to
get his friend bring him around to
witness it and within those few minutes
the bright eruption had moved and was
now at location C and D on the diagram
now this eruption was right in the
center of the sun's disk and so it came
straight towards us 36 hours later we
had the most magnificent auroral
displays across the whole planet
on the right is Frederick church's
painting of 1865 and that's painting of
the Aurora as viewed from the Caribbean
normally the Aurora is a northern or
southern polar region event only but
when you got a really powerful magnetic
storm and a really powerful eruption
then it can drive the Aurora
much lower latitudes all the way down to
the equator almost so let's just back we
talked a little bit about the Sun having
formed eight at the beginning of the
solar system 4.6 billion years ago out
of a cloud of swirling dust and gas and
gravity was causing things to fall
inwards the Sun formed right at the
center of all of that and the plants
begin to form in the disk now if you
have a very very large nebula you can
form a much larger star and if you don't
then perhaps you'll end up with a
smaller star or even more than one star
and you can get groups of them but I
thought I'd just show you to the
relative sizes of different stars Trey
that's that our Sun is a relatively
modest star here is the Sun the left
there compared for size with Sirius and
Pollux and the orange giant star
Arcturus and Jupiter's on the diagram
there would you believe is a single
pixel and the earth well not visible at
this scale so the Sun is really quite a
small star compared to those others but
those others are by no means the largest
we can step that scale up so that we
have the Sun as one pixel and Sirius
Pollux and Arcturus now look small
compared to Rigel older barren and
they're not super Giants Betelgeuse and
Antares there but Antares is not the
largest artist we know is yv Canis
Majoris which makes even Antares look
fairly modest there's about 200 times
the mass of our Sun and if it was where
the Sun is the whole solar system would
fit easily inside the envelope of Y V
Canis Majoris there what about the other
end of the size scale well there's their
quadrant of the Sun there and a small
star next to it for scale a red dwarf
star
our son is a yellow dwarf there are
slightly smaller ones which would be
orange dwarfs and then the smallest
stars of all that are proper stars are
these red dwarfs and they can be as
small as seven and a half percent of the
mass of the Sun that's the smallest mass
at which the pressure cooker effect in
the center manages to build a
temperature of 10 million degrees Kelvin
at 10 million degrees there is enough
energy to smash those protons those
hydrogen nuclei together and form the
first step in the food chain which is
deuterium on that diagram that I showed
you of the four steps of nuclear fusion
that first step is the most difficult
and it as I said needs 10 million
degrees so you need to be at least seven
and a half percent of the mass of the
Sun in order to do that and then you'll
be a small red dwarf star planet like
Jupiter shown there - the same scale is
really a failed star it's we call it a
gas giant it's made of more or less the
same mixture of hydrogen and helium but
it's only 0.1 percent of the mass of our
Sun and to have enough mass to generate
the temperature for nuclear fusion and
be a red dwarf star it would need to
take 75 Jupiter's and pack them together
so there was no danger that Jupiter was
ever really going to manage that but in
between we have these weird objects
called brown dwarfs got three of them
shown on the diagram here and underneath
you can see their names
today one Lisa 2 to 9 B which is the
brown dwarf we've got another type of
failed star larger than Jupiter but
smaller than its host pleaser 2 to 9a
that is the primary star of that system
and we've got Weezer 182 eight and you
can see the temperatures underneath them
these brown dwarfs are like Jupiter but
bigger but not big enough to hit that 10
million degree temperature to turn on
nuclear fusion they probably got a lot
of energy out of the Lord Kelvin like
gravitational collapse that formed them
to warm them up a bit but particularly
objects like today one there those
probably managed to build a temperature
of a million degrees in the center and
that's enough to do a little bit of
nuclear fusion just enough to take any
deuterium that to nucleus but form of
hydrogen with a neutron and a proton two
particles in the nucleus you can fuse
deuterium at about a million degrees the
thing is there's only a tiny fraction of
deuterium in the hydrogen that you are
made of as an ordinary star so it really
doesn't do you very much good but it's
enough to heat Ted a1 up a little bit
and you can also use some nuclear tricks
with elements like lithium and around a
million degrees and get a bit of energy
that way so some of these brown dwarfs
get a little bit of an energy boost from
that and it warms them up from being
warmer than Jupiter as you can see on
the diagram there but they're really
failed stars so if we ignore the brown
dwarfs in the just the ordinary stars
this is the classic hertzsprung-russell
diagram of stars we have those red
dwarfs down at the bottom right and you
work your way up through the orange
stars the yellow stars like the Sun
there and then up to the white stars
like Sirius and on up to the blue ones
this is just increasing temperature
exactly like heating an iron bar you
start with red hearts then orange then
yellow then white-hot and if you kept on
going
your iron bar would melt but the next
step is blue hot for stars and it's also
the mess
the heavier star is the more massive it
is the greater the pressure and the
temperature in its core and so they're
more vigorously it's able to carry out
fusion and so you get a higher
temperature for a bigger star and so the
little stars at the bottom there the red
dwarfs sitting there barely able to do
fusion at all and the ones right at the
top left that blue giants are ripping
through their fuels and enormous rate
you can also see that the line is not
quite straight and that's because of a
process that kicks in around about the
mass of the Sun you can get the core
temperature up to about 15 million
degrees and a second process involving
carbon can kick off their chick seller
rates the nuclear fusion which is why
that line is not quite straight but
above it you can see the Giants and the
super Giants and their different
processes going on in those and then
also down at the bottom the white dwarfs
yeah we'll talk all about those in turn
as we go on so in the middle of a
sun-like star you have a balance of the
energy released by fusion pushing
outwards vs. is the force of gravity
trying to crush the star down but
eventually once the hydrogen in the core
of the star runs out then that fusion
can't continue at the same rate and the
gravity will overwhelm the core and a
rather curious process then happens to
stars like the Sun rather than
collapsing it turning through these red
giants they swell right up and cool on
their outer surfaces and the reason is a
little bit complicated going on in the
middle what happens is that the helium
that's been made in the first stage of
an ordinary star falls to the center and
is inert
we used as fuel so you get a ball of
this leftover helium gradually growing
in the middle and because it can't be
used for nuclear fusion can't release
any energy it tends to collapse on
itself and get increasingly dense and as
it does so it releases gravitational
energy which of course turns into heat
and that acts like a spark plug igniting
a shell of hydrogen that undergoes
fusion around the outside of it and then
that shell continues to dump more helium
into the course of the helium core grows
bigger and the shell then moves outwards
burning its way out through the star but
as that hydrogen shell advances out
through the star it's putting it out
more and more overall energy because the
surface area of that sphere are growing
inside the star is getting
disproportionately larger and larger as
it increases and that acts to push the
outer layers away and creates this
swelling up to form a red giant indeed
in the end it drives the outer layers of
the star away completely and exposes the
dead nuclear core that helium core in
the middle and leaves us with what we
call a planetary nebula which is a silly
name they shouldn't we call planetary
anything because they have nothing to do
with planets they're all to do with
stars they're the dead smoke rings of a
star that's puffed itself apart by this
process of shell burning right in the
center of several of these you can see
there is a hot white dwarf star right in
the middle there surrounded by layers of
gas and you can see how it's puffed off
the outer layers perhaps not all at once
but in several waves and sometimes it's
puffed it off out along the north and
south spin axis as the ejected plasmas
got caught up in a spinning magnetic
field which creates those butterfly type
shapes
and the tourist type shapes right in the
center that nuclear core is one of these
white dwarf stars and no nuclear fusion
is going on inside these they've
collapsed down under gravity to a
density limit and that density limit is
held up from further collapse by the
electron soup that's flowing around
inside the white dwarfs the electrons
are all negatively charged they don't
like each other very much they don't
want to be compressed together and this
electron degenerate matter threw a trick
of quantum mechanics is like the fifth
state of matter beyond plasma a sugar
cube size of electron degenerate matter
would weigh around a turn it's very very
dense indeed and a white dwarf
containing half the mass of the Sun will
collapse down to be about the size of
the earth there's a picture there of the
nearest brightest star to us called
Sirius that has a white dwarf companion
called the pup marked with the little
arrow they're orbiting around it so that
used to be a red giant and has now
collapsed down just to leave the dead
core there and these white dwarfs they
don't release any more energy from
fusion they just very hot to begin with
and they do indeed cool down over
billions of years and eventually they'll
fade out as a black dwarf but if you
have a star much larger than the Sun
then it can generate enough pressure and
temperature right in the center around
about 100 million degrees Kelvin and
then helium nuclei formed in the first
stage of the nuclear fusion process from
hydrogen can get rammed together tightly
enough that they themselves combine to
make the next elements carbon and oxygen
that suddenly releases another burst of
activity within the star and you end up
with of course the carbon oxygen
falling to the center and a helium
burning shell around that and a hydrogen
burning shell around that in these
layers and if you keep going for largest
us the very big stars indeed they can
work their way through the elements that
hydrogen makes helium helium makes
carbon you can then get neon oxygen
silicon and finally the silicon can be
fused to make iron Fe right in the
middle there now you can see that
actually the efficiency of these
processes gets worse and worse as time
goes on for a star like this the
hydrogen fuel perhaps lasts you seven
million years the helium is only gonna
last half a million years carbon burning
will cost will give you six hundred
years only neon burning one year oxygen
being converted to silicon six months
and silicon to iron just a single day
before you're out of options you've now
made an iron core we are very hot high
pressure iron core and if you try to
compress the iron and make heavier
elements like lead or bismuth or tin any
of those then actually instead of it
releasing energy which is the life force
of stars its saps energy it costs energy
to build the heavier ones the iron
nuclei are the most energy efficient
nuclei of all they're the most stable
and so once the star starts trying to do
that instead of the core releasing
energy it's going to start eating up
energy cool down very rapidly and the
whole core is then going to not be able
to have the temperature and pressure to
resist the pull of gravity and so the
core collapses in on itself
the overlying layers now have nothing
supporting them so they fall inwards as
well under gravity until it all crashes
together in the center
and then rebounds in an enormous
supernova explosion that tears the star
apart and this is the Crab Nebula the
results of such a supernova explosion a
little animation which illustrates we
know that it's still expanding outwards
out into space and we can work backwards
and figure out that it was the result of
an explosion in the year 1054 ad and
that ties up perfectly with chinese
astronomers who reported seeing the
explosion and seeing a bright new guest
star as they called it that was as
bright as the full moon for three months
can be seen in daylight until it
gradually faded away and of course a
thousand years later we're still able to
see the expanding shockwave but that's
process of the explosion there was so
violent that it's thrown all the
elements that were made in those outer
layers of the star back across the
cosmos and enables the formation of
second and third generation stars and
planetary systems containing all those
elements like carbon and silicon and
oxygen and so on that are so important
but the shockwave of the explosion
itself is where some of the heavier
elements like lead and bismuth and tin
and uranium all get built in the
expanding shockwave of these stars when
they explode in the center the core is
crushed down not even the electron
degeneracy pressure is able to withstand
it for this size of star and the
electrons and protons are rammed
together to form neutrons negative
electrons combine with the positive
protons to make neutral neutrons and you
end up with a ball of neutrons about ten
kilometers across that might weigh
several times the mass of the Sun and
has the density of an atomic nucleus so
a teaspoonful weighs five trillion tons
this is an absolutely unimaginable
amount of density
and there's an artist's impression of a
neutron star and Manhattan Island and
the Hudson River there look there are
these neutron stars pick up a lot of
spin as well rather as a skater pulling
their arms in on an ice rink they as
they condense and contract down all that
angular momentum spins them very fast
and they tend to have very strong
magnetic fields and those magnetic
fields interact with the material around
them and we get radio waves coming off
impulses as they spin so here's their
Crab Nebula in visible light we can
overlay on top of a picture and you can
see the Pulsar in the center and the
Whirlpool of material surrounding it
where it's spinning at incredible speed
and generating a jet of material coming
off it all of that activity adds up to
making a terrific amount of radio noise
coming away from it you hear it here on
earth as pulses you can hopefully hear
the pulses recorded from a radio
telescope here of the sound of a
spinning pulsar but neutron stars
not the final end stage they're made of
this neutron-degenerate matter and
they're only stable up to around three
times the mass of our Sun anything more
than that exceeds what's called the
Tollman Oppenheimer Volkoff limits after
the scientists that calculated it and
what that basically says is that beyond
three solar masses the pressure is so
great that the neutron-degenerate matter
cannot withstand the force of gravity
and so the neutron stars get crushed
down even further now sometimes the
neutron stars will get formed in pairs
if you have a binary pair of very large
stars formed out of a very dense nib of
them I think they will both the stars
will eventually form a neutron star and
the neutron stars can then orbit around
each other
emitting gravity waves and spiraling
inwards as they do so we've actually
detected this with the LIGO and Virgo
gravity wave detectors now and listened
to the sound of the wobbling of space
caused by the gravity waves from neutron
stars that collided and when they
collide it creates what's called a
killer nova the killer nova can be
another source of building those heavier
elements heavier than iron ordinary
stars make everything up to and
including iron while they're still alive
when they explode as a supernova or when
two neutron stars blow up like this as a
killing over that's where you get all
the energy to make the heavy elements
the lead and the gold and the uranium
and all those others they're roughly
half of the gold in your wedding ring
was built in a collision between two
neutron stars in a kill and over
explosion and the rest came from
previous generations of supernovae but
of course the end stage either of
putting too much material together by
adding a little bit at a time to an
existing neutron star or by smashing two
together
and exceeding that Tolman Oppenheimer
Volkov limits of three solar masses
results in gravity winning and
everything collapsing down to form a
black hole gravity without limits a
whole new region of space-time cut off
from the rest of us is formed inside
what's called an event horizon and the
story of black holes is a whole other
talk and we will get onto that in the
next episode of the introduction to
astronomy thank you very much for
listening I hope you've enjoyed that and
I'll see you next time